INSTALL FOR THE MPATROL LIBRARY


This document contains information about building and installing mpatrol.  It
currently needs to be done manually but I might consider using GNU configure at
some point in the future.

The mpatrol library was initially developed on an Amiga 4000/040 running AmigaOS
3.1.  I then installed Redhat Linux 5.1 on my Amiga and added support for
Linux/m68k.  I've tried my best to make it as easy as possible to build and
install mpatrol on any system, but it isn't likely to run smoothly for
everybody.


Building and installing

  * Go into the build directory and then into the appropriate subdirectory for
    your system.

  * Edit the Makefile in that directory and check that it is using the
    appropriate compiler and build tools.  The `CC' macro specifies the
    compiler, the `AR' macro specifies the tool used to build the archive
    library and the `LD' macro specifies the tool to build the shared library.
    The `CFLAGS' macro specifies compiler options that are always to be used,
    the `OFLAGS' macro specifies optimisation options for the compiler, the
    `SFLAGS' macro specifies options to be passed to the compiler when building
    a shared library and the `TFLAGS' macro specifies options to be passed to
    the compiler when building a thread-safe library.  You may also need to
    change the library names and library build commands on different systems.

  * Use the make command (or equivalent) to build the mpatrol library in archive
    form.  The `all' target builds all possible combinations of the mpatrol
    library for your system.  The `clean' target removes all relevant object
    files from the current directory, while the `clobber' target also removes
    all libraries that have been built from the current directory.

  * Copy all of the libraries that have been built into your local library
    directory.  If there were symbolic links created in the build directory
    then these should be recreated in the local library directory rather than
    simply copying them.

  * Go up two directory levels into the src directory and copy the `mpatrol.h'
    header file into your local include directory.

  * On UNIX platforms, go up one directory level into the bin directory and
    copy the `mpatrol' shell script into your local bin directory.

  * On UNIX platforms, go up one directory level into the man directory and
    copy the man1 and man3 subdirectories to your local man directory.
    Unfortunately, the location for manual pages varies from system to system
    so you may or may not also be able to copy the cat1 and cat3 subdirectories
    as well.  The man* subdirectories contain the unformatted manual pages while
    the cat* subdirectories contain the formatted manual pages.
